---
title: Thoughts on the Recent *Value in Health* Themed Section on Value Assessment Frameworks in the
  US
output: html_document
---

### Value Assessment Frameworks
The ISPOR recently released an issue of Value in Health with a special focus on value asssessment frameworks in the US: [link here](http://www.valueinhealthjournal.com/issue/S1098-3015(17)X0012-0). It's a useful read if you want to get up to date on how major organizations approach the question of 'How we should assess value in healthcare?' In this post I wanted to touch on two thoughts I was left with after reading through the conclusions and recommendations.

### The Emphasis on Technology vs Practice
The report puts a major emphasis on the value of medical technology--the vast majority of which can be described as pharmaceuticals and medical devices but could also include something like gene-editing technology.

On some level this makes a lot of sense. The question of the efficacy/effectiveness of technology mostly revolves around comparisons of different technologies. Think about things like clinical trials, questions of 'substantial equivalency', comparative effectiveness research, etc..In most of these cases we are taking one technology and comparing it's effectiveness/equivalency vis-a-vis another technology. From here it's natural to add cost comparisons and all of a sudden you have a way to quantify 'bang for your buck' (i.e., do CEA, MCDA, ROI analyses, etc.. where there's a dollar figure invovled). 

The place where I wish there was more...oomph...is in whether and how these frameworks should be used to determine the value of medical practice. By medical practice I'm not talking about real-world evidence studies which, to my mind, is largely intended to still assess the relative value of technologies, but in a way that deals with problems inherent to clinical trials[^1]. Instead, what I mean are questions about how providers should practice medicine-How often should a provider check in with a patient? When should you recommend a CT scan with and without contrasts as opposed to just one? Are annual A1c checks necessary all the time? All of these, to my mind, move away from the question of which technology to use in a relatively narrow decision context and instead moves to the question of what pattern of medical practice is optimal for a given patient over a certain length of time. 

To be fair, it's not like the question of practice variation is ignored. My take-away from a lot of the 'geographic variation in medical spending' research is that practice variation, rather than the use of certain technologies *per se*, can drive cost differences without a major change in outcomes. Also some of the frameowrks reviewed by the ISPOR taskforce, notably those from the medical/specialty societies, emphasize the consideration of care pathways and clinical guidelines which are essentially ways of encouraging providers to harmonize their practice patterns. Still, I'm struck by the volume of articles/research/thought that is given to the question of which technology is better as opposed to the question of how providers should practice. In my mind this is largely a data/measurement question-it's a lot easier to measure whether a patient got drug A versus drug B than it is to measure whether a patient was 'exposed' to practice pattern A versus practice pattern B[^2]. While I've seen assessments of care pathways[^3], they are generally very complex and rely heavily on modeling (i.e., simulation) methods where we have to assume certain patterns rather than extracting patterns from real-world data.

So, what does all of this mean? Obviously it's important to compare the relative effectiveness of different technologies but, I guess my belief is if the goal of healthcare reform and change is to drive better outcomes at lower costs I think it's a mistake to ignore or de-emphasize the potential for value assessment for medical practice.

[^1]: These are at least twofold: 1. The fact that trial particiapnts are generally healthier than the population where a technology will be used, and, 2. The fact that providers in trials will have better knowledge/skills/experience working with a technology compared with 'everyday' providers.
[^2]: This assumes it's even possible to describe practice provided by say, 10,000 providers into a single, summary type of measure. Fortunately, though, this is an area where I think a lot of the work in statistical learning can make a difference. The field has done a lot of work on pattern recognitiion and detection
[^3]: [Here's an example from NICE](https://pathways.nice.org.uk/pathways/chronic-heart-failure)

### Coverage and Reimbursement Decisions in Risk-Sharing Arrangements
The other thing that struck me about this report is the relative emphasis on health plans as the arbiters of reimbursement and coverage and, by extension, the group most likley to say 'no' when a new technology enters the market. While this is probably true now, I'm left wondering if it will be the case 5-10 years from now. 

Specifically, I'm seeing a lot of push for providers to bear the risk of health plan enrollees. This can happen with stuff like bundled payments, primary care capitation, episode-based payments, or shared savings arrangements where providers earn more if beneficiares medical expenditures are lower than expected. As there's more and more of this type of contracting going on, I'm left wondering how much of a role plans and payors will have in determining reimbursement and coverage.

Think about it. On the one hand, no one wants to be the group to say 'no'. What governement agency or health plan wants to explain why a patient shouldn't receive a treatment when there's a chance, even a small one, of beneift? On the other hand, plans and agencies have a strong incentive for making these types of decisions in a world driven by fee-for-service. If providers are going to bill for therapy A at \$10,000 and therapy B at \$2,000 there's an \$8,000 incentive for plans to figure out ways to encourage therapy B--one of which is to go through and rigorously assess when therapy A is unlikely to provide strong clinical benefit. However, that incentive shifts if the plan says to a provider 'here's \$9,000 for a member, you figure out how to use it'.

Now, I'm not saying that plans and agencies will abdicate the role of reimbursement and coverage decision-makers, but it will be interesting to see how invested they are moving forward. I could easily see a path where the status quo remains because providers refuse to engage in extensive risk sharing, or because the fear of being perceived as uncaring or unsympathetic causes such backlash from providers that plans are forced to retain coverage decisions. On the other hand, I can also see a path where providers embrace the shared decision-making paradigm and are comfortable bringing cost into care decisions. In a third outcome, I could see providers and plans recognizing that someone has to say 'no', but because of unwillingness at an individual stakeholder level we see the formation and strengthening of centralized authorities (e.g., bigger, more influential non-profits like ICER or even a government agency dedicated to this type of questioning).

Anyway, my point in all of this is to say that while plans/agencies are currently responsible for remibursement and coverage, I'm not sure if that's going to hold true in a world of greater risk sharing. It will be interesting to see what happens.
